Add documentation on connecting to a service (#6114)
redhat-developer/odo: docs/website/docs/user-guides/advanced/connecting-a-service.md

---
title: Connecting to a service
sidebar_position: 1
---

This tutorial will show you how you can connect your Go application to a mongodb service.

Building on top of the [Go quickstart guide](../quickstart/go.md), we will extend the application to check if it is connected to a mongodb service.

### Pre-requisites
1. Install Service Binding Operator on your cluster.  See [installation instruction](https://operatorhub.io/operator/service-binding-operator).

2. Install Percona Server Mongodb operator on your cluster. See [installation instruction](https://operatorhub.io/operator/percona-server-mongodb-operator).
:::note

> The operator will be installed in a new namespace called "my-percona-server-mongodb-operator" and for the sake of simplicity, we will use this namespace for this guide. 

Reviewer: > for the sake of simplicity, we will use this namespace for this guide.
>
How are we using this namespace in this guide? This note is not necessary to me, as we are installing the service instance in the current namespace, and will be using it from there, no?

Author: Perhaps you're right. It's not a necessary note.

 •  Executing the application (command: run)  ...
 -  Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:40001 -> 8080

Watching for changes in the current directory /tmp/go
Press Ctrl+c to exit `odo dev` and delete resources from the cluster

Pushing files...

File /tmp/go/.odo changed
 •  Waiting for Kubernetes resources  ...
 ✓  Syncing files into the container [1ms]

Watching for changes in the current directory /tmp/go
Press Ctrl+c to exit `odo dev` and delete resources from the cluster
```

### Check the connection

Once the application is running, try calling the URL and check the response.
```shell
curl 127.0.0.1:40001
```
```shell
$ curl 127.0.0.1:40001
failed to connect: error validating uri: username required if URI contains user info
```

This response is expected because we have not yet exposed the connection information to our cluster environment and hence have failed to connect to the mongodb service.

### Connect the application to the mongodb service
Let's now connect our application to the mongodb service with `odo add binding`.

From a new terminal, run the following command that will add necessary data to devfile.yaml:
```shell

> odo add binding --service mongodb-instance/PerconaServerMongoDB --name my-go-app-mongodb-instance --bind-as-files=false

Reviewer: Just a suggestion to avoid having to scroll horizontally:

```suggestion
odo add binding \
  --service mongodb-instance/PerconaServerMongoDB \
  --name my-go-app-mongodb-instance \
  --bind-as-files=false
```

---

> title: Connecting to a service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Connecting to a Service
```

sidebar_position: 1
---

> This tutorial will show you how you can connect your Go application to a mongodb service.

Reviewer 2: Avoid sentences like these, we already know it's a tutorial.

Instead, add a quick sentence explaining what a service is?

Ex:

`Building on top of the [Go quickstart guide](../quickstart/go.md), we will extend the application by connecting it to a deployable MongoDB service.`

Building on top of the [Go quickstart guide](../quickstart/go.md), we will extend the application to check if it is connected to a mongodb service.

> ### Pre-requisites

Reviewer 2: Look at the other guides and implement `Step 1, Step 2, etc." so it's similarly formatted.

> ### Pre-requisites

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

> 1. Install Service Binding Operator on your cluster.  See [installation instruction](https://operatorhub.io/operator/service-binding-operator).

Reviewer 2: Explain the `installation instruction` part?

Author: If I do that, then I'll have to explain for the other operator as well. I think I'll let the user work it out.
But, I think it would be nice to add why this operator should be installed, no?

> 1. Install Service Binding Operator on your cluster.  See [installation instruction](https://operatorhub.io/operator/service-binding-operator).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. [Install the Service Binding Operator via Operator Hub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/service-binding-operator).
```

Would be better? Same goes for the percona server install part

> 2. Install Percona Server Mongodb operator on your cluster. See [installation instruction](https://operatorhub.io/operator/percona-server-mongodb-operator).

Reviewer 2: Needs to be `MongoDB` throughout document as that's the official spelling.

:::note
The operator will be installed in a new namespace called "my-percona-server-mongodb-operator" and will be usable from that namespace only.
:::

> 3. Create a mongodb service.

Reviewer 2: What's the source for this? Where did you get this? Explain where it's from (operator hub I'm assuming?)

import CreateMongodbService from './_create-mongodb-service.mdx';

<CreateMongodbService/>

> ### Implement the code logic

Reviewer 2: See "Adding steps". Should be Step 1, 2, etc.

:::note

> If you're already running `odo dev` in a terminal, exit it and start afresh.

Reviewer 2: isn't this implied? no need for note i believe.

Author: At the beginning we mentioned we're building this on top of the quickstart guide. The last step there is to run `odo dev`. If it is still running, this note makes sense IMO.

Reviewer 2: That makes sense. I reccomend we remove all informal language however like "you're", so I reccomend this change:

:::

> The new code is simple. We obtain the connection information (username, password, and host) from the environment, and use it to connect to the mongodb service and ping it. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The below code obtains the connection information (username, password, and host) from the environment. We then use it to connect to the MongoDB service and query it. 
```

Maybe this will be better?

Author: I'd stick to _ping_, since that's what we're really doing in the code. _Query_ sounds more like we're querying something from the database which we are not in this case.

Replace the content of your `main.go` with the following content:
```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"
	"net/http"
	"os"

	"go.mongodb.org/mongo-driver/mongo"
	"go.mongodb.org/mongo-driver/mongo/options"
	"go.mongodb.org/mongo-driver/mongo/readpref"
)

// Connection URI
var (

> 	USERNAME = os.Getenv("PERCONASERVERMONGODB_MONGODB_USER_ADMIN_USER")

Reviewer 2: We should add to the tutorial how these environment variables were obtained. Isn't it shown with `odo describe`?

Author: `odo describe binding` also exposes a lot of other environment variables. I think it will be simpler to not talk about them for the sake of simplicity.

Reviewer 2: Even I didn't realize that it actually shows the environment variable.. how could a new user know either when this doc is in an initial user guide? 

A user can install mongodb operator and then realize after "what are the env variables again I should use?"

I think it's important to describe *before* this step that we should explain how these environment variables are retrieved / added under prerequisites.

Example, for Step 4 in prerequisites, we should describe how we are able to find out all these variables that can be used in your application.

	PASSWORD = os.Getenv("PERCONASERVERMONGODB_MONGODB_USER_ADMIN_PASSWORD")
	HOST     = os.Getenv("PERCONASERVERMONGODB_HOST")
	uri      = fmt.Sprintf("mongodb://%s:%s@%s:27017/?maxPoolSize=20&w=majority", USERNAME, PASSWORD, HOST)
)

func main() {
	http.HandleFunc("/", HelloServer)

> 	http.ListenAndServe("0.0.0.0:8080", nil)

Reviewer 2: shouldn't port be dynamic / so we can change it within devfile deploy?

Author: I've simply extended the quickstart guide, but perhaps you're right. I'll look into that.

Author: I am not sure how to address this comment. The default port in the devfile.yaml is 8080, and it works for this guide. We do not expose the port information in environment in any way that I could obtain it. I could modify main.go to read the devfile and obtain port from it, but it doesn't seem worth the effort to me. I think I'd keep things as is for now,  unless you have a better solution.

}

func HelloServer(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	// Create a new client and connect to the server
	client, err := mongo.Connect(context.TODO(), options.Client().ApplyURI(uri))

	if err != nil {
		fmt.Fprintf(w, "failed to connect: %s", err.Error())
		return
	}
	defer func() {
		if err = client.Disconnect(context.TODO()); err != nil {
			fmt.Fprintf(w, "failed to disconnect: %s", err.Error())
			return
		}
	}()

	// Ping the primary
	if err := client.Ping(context.TODO(), readpref.Primary()); err != nil {
		fmt.Fprintf(w, "unable to connect to the server: %s", err.Error())
		return
	}

	fmt.Fprintf(w, "Successfully connected and pinged.")
}
```

> We will be using the mongodb client library, so let's update the go.mod with this dependency by running the following command: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will be using the MongoDB client library. Update the go.mod dependency by running the following command: 
```

```shell
go get go.mongodb.org/mongo-driver/mongo
```

> ### Run the application on the cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Run the application
```
 add "step X" to it too

> Run this application on the cluster with `odo dev`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run the application with `odo dev`.
```

Author: I'd rather keep `on the cluster` as is because it makes sense.

```shell
odo dev
```
```shell
$ odo dev
  __
 /  \__     Developing using the my-go-app Devfile
 \__/  \    Namespace: my-percona-server-mongodb-operator
 /  \__/    odo version: v3.0.0-rc1
 \__/

↪ Deploying to the cluster in developer mode
 •  Waiting for Kubernetes resources  ...
 ⚠  Pod is Pending
 ✓  Pod is Running
 ✓  Syncing files into the container [152ms]
 ✓  Building your application in container on cluster (command: build) [15s]
 •  Executing the application (command: run)  ...
 -  Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:40001 -> 8080

Watching for changes in the current directory /tmp/go
Press Ctrl+c to exit `odo dev` and delete resources from the cluster

Pushing files...

> 

Reviewer 2: remove spacing? I feel like a lot of these console outputs have a lot of spacing already

File /tmp/go/.odo changed
 •  Waiting for Kubernetes resources  ...
 ✓  Syncing files into the container [1ms]

Watching for changes in the current directory /tmp/go
Press Ctrl+c to exit `odo dev` and delete resources from the cluster
```

### Check the connection

> Once the application is running, try calling the URL and check the response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the application is running, query the URL and check the response.
```

```shell
curl 127.0.0.1:40001
```
```shell
$ curl 127.0.0.1:40001
failed to connect: error validating uri: username required if URI contains user info
```

> This response is expected because we have not yet exposed the connection information to our cluster environment and hence have failed to connect to the mongodb service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The error is expected as we have not yet exposed the connection information to our cluster environment. 
```

### Connect the application to the mongodb service

> Let's now connect our application to the mongodb service with `odo add binding`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Connect the application to the MongoDB service with `odo add binding`.
```

From a new terminal, run the following command that will add necessary data to devfile.yaml:
```shell
odo add binding \
  --service mongodb-instance/PerconaServerMongoDB \
  --name my-go-app-mongodb-instance \
  --bind-as-files=false
```
```shell
$ odo add binding --service mongodb-instance/PerconaServerMongoDB --name my-go-app-mongodb-instance --bind-as-files=false
 ✓  Successfully added the binding to the devfile.
Run `odo dev` to create it on the cluster.
```

:::note

> `--binding-as-files=false` because our code logic relies on obtaining environment variables from the system instead of reading data from files.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this part should even have it's own section to explain what's happening rather than just a note. Pretty important that the user does not miss this.

Author: I've added a link to the add-binding.md reference where this has been explained.

:::

> Wait for `odo dev` to detect the new changes to the devfile.yaml. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Wait for `odo dev` to detect the new changes to `devfile.yaml`. 
```

```shell

> $ odo dev

Reviewer 2: very long output, maybe remove some of the spacing and file refreshing?

Author: It's all copy pasted. I was thinking to toggle the output.

Updating Component...

 •  Waiting for Kubernetes resources  ...
Error occurred on Push - watch command was unable to push component: some servicebindings are not injected

 ⚠  Pod is Terminating
 •  Waiting for Kubernetes resources  ...
 ✗  Finished executing the application (command: run) [1m]
 ⚠  No pod exists
 ⚠  Pod is Pending
 ✓  Pod is Running
 ✓  Syncing files into the container [170ms]
 ✓  Building your application in container on cluster (command: build) [192ms]
 •  Executing the application (command: run)  ...
 -  Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:40001 -> 8080
                                                                                                                                                  

Watching for changes in the current directory /tmp/go
Press Ctrl+c to exit `odo dev` and delete resources from the cluster

Pushing files...

File /tmp/go/devfile.yaml changed

File /tmp/go/.odo/devstate.json changed
 •  Waiting for Kubernetes resources  ...
 ✓  Syncing files into the container [1ms]

Watching for changes in the current directory /tmp/go
Press Ctrl+c to exit `odo dev` and delete resources from the cluster

```

### Check the connection again

> Once it is done, call the URL again. We should now be connected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Query the URL again for a successful connection: 
```

```shell
curl 127.0.0.1:40001
```
```shell
$ curl 127.0.0.1:40001
Successfully connected and pinged.
```

### Exit and cleanup

> Press `Ctrl+c` to exit `odo dev`.

Reviewer 2: This is already in the output? Perhaps we don't need this in the doc?

Author: I think it's alright to be explicit here before user proceeds with the next step.

---
title: Connecting to a Service
sidebar_position: 1
---

> Building on top of the [Go quickstart guide](../quickstart/go.md), this guide will extend the application to connect it to a deployable MongoDB service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building on top of the [Go quickstart guide](../quickstart/go.md), this guide will connect a service to the Go application.
```

## Prerequisites

> 1. [Install the Service Binding Operator via Operator Hub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/service-binding-operator). Read [here](../../command-reference/add-binding.md#description) to know why this is required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. [Install the Service Binding Operator via Operator Hub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/service-binding-operator). [Read why this is required.](../../command-reference/add-binding.md#description)

2. [Install Percona Server Mongodb Operator via Operator Hub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/percona-server-mongodb-operator).
:::note

> The operator will be installed in a new namespace called "my-percona-server-mongodb-operator" and will be usable from that namespace only.

Reviewer 2: Won't this mess up deployment with the service if it's only usable in that namespace?

Maybe we should add instructions to deploy / use this Go application in the same namespace as the operator?

Author: I just realized that we don't need to. A service deployed in any namespace is still accessible to the Go application deployed in a different namespace.

:::
3. Create a MongoDB service.

import CreateMongodbService from './_create-mongodb-service.mdx';

<CreateMongodbService/>

> ## Step 0. Implement the code logic

Reviewer 2: We put "Step 0" if it's an optional step :) This hould be step 1.

Author: I thought we were just following the programming indexing system where you begin with 0. Also, I still have to work on a few changes that you've requested, so please wait until I'm done with those before you review again.

:::note

> If you're already running `odo dev` in a terminal, exit it and start afresh.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are already running `odo dev` in the terminal, press "Ctrl+c" and exit.
```

---
title: Connecting to a Service
sidebar_position: 1
---

Building on top of the [Go quickstart guide](../quickstart/go.md), this guide will connect a service to the Go application.

## Prerequisites
1. [Install the Service Binding Operator via Operator Hub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/service-binding-operator). [Read why this is required.](../../command-reference/add-binding.md#description)

2. [Install Percona Server Mongodb Operator via Operator Hub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/percona-server-mongodb-operator).
:::note

> The operator will be installed in a new namespace called "my-percona-server-mongodb-operator" and the service can only be deployed in this namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The operator will be installed in a new namespace called "my-percona-server-mongodb-operator". the service can only be deployed in this namespace.
```

Still we don't explain why this namespace :(, bit confusing IMO.

I think we should actually show to use `kubectl` commands? Because then we can specify what namespace to install this.

```

2. [Install Percona Server Mongodb Operator via Operator Hub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/percona-server-mongodb-operator).

Install to the same namespace as your component:

kubectl create -n mynamespace -f https://operatorhub.io/install/percona-server-mongodb-operator.yaml

```

Obviously not "mynamespace" but something else?

This explains to the user that the service will be in a specific namespace, etc at the beginning of the doc.

:::

> 3. Create a MongoDB service. This service has been created with a minimal

Reviewer 2: ??? sentence cuts off

-  Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:40001 -> 8080

Watching for changes in the current directory /tmp/go
Press Ctrl+c to exit `odo dev` and delete resources from the cluster

Pushing files...

File /tmp/go/.odo changed
•  Waiting for Kubernetes resources  ...
✓  Syncing files into the container [1ms]

Watching for changes in the current directory /tmp/go
Press Ctrl+c to exit `odo dev` and delete resources from the cluster
```
</details>

### Check the connection

Once the application is running, query the URL and check the response.
```shell
curl 127.0.0.1:40001
```
<details>
<summary>Sample output:</summary>

```shell
$ curl 127.0.0.1:40001
failed to connect: error validating uri: username required if URI contains user info
```
</details>

The error is expected as we have not yet exposed the connection information to our cluster environment.

## Step 3. Connect the application to the MongoDB service
Connect the application to the MongoDB service with `odo add binding`.

From a new terminal, run the following command that will add necessary data to `devfile.yaml`:
```shell
odo add binding \
  --service mongodb-instance/PerconaServerMongoDB \

>   --service-namespace=my-percona-server-mongodb-operator \

Reviewer 2: I don't like the fact that we *have* to specify this namespace throughout the guide? We should add this to the beginning of the guide / prerequisites that we can specify our own too. See other comment.

Author: I don't think we're specifying it throughout the doc. It's only for this command, and while creating mongodb instance because that is the only namespace this CRD is accessible from.

⚠  Pod is Terminating
•  Waiting for Kubernetes resources  ...
✗  Finished executing the application (command: run) [1m]
⚠  No pod exists
⚠  Pod is Pending
✓  Pod is Running
✓  Syncing files into the container [170ms]
✓  Building your application in container on cluster (command: build) [192ms]
•  Executing the application (command: run)  ...
-  Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:40001 -> 8080

Watching for changes in the current directory /tmp/go
Press Ctrl+c to exit `odo dev` and delete resources from the cluster

Pushing files...

File /tmp/go/devfile.yaml changed

File /tmp/go/.odo/devstate.json changed
•  Waiting for Kubernetes resources  ...
✓  Syncing files into the container [1ms]

Watching for changes in the current directory /tmp/go
Press Ctrl+c to exit `odo dev` and delete resources from the cluster

```
</details>

## Step 4. Check the connection again
Query the URL again for a successful connection: 
```shell
curl 127.0.0.1:40001
```

<details>
<summary>Sample output:</summary>

```shell
$ curl 127.0.0.1:40001
Successfully connected and pinged.
```
</details>

## Step 5. Exit and cleanup
Press `Ctrl+c` to exit `odo dev`.

> Delete the MongoDB instance that we had created.

Reviewer 2: Stupid question, but why are we using kubectl / oc commands for deleting this mongodb instance?

Because `odo delete binding` isn't added yet right?

We should add a note that we intent on implementing this so we update our documentation accordingly in the future.

Author: I do not think we intend on implementing `odo delete binding`. We already have `odo remove binding` that will remove the binding from devfile.yaml, and eventually it will delete the ServiceBinding instance from cluster, but the mongodb instance stays the same.
Since we created the mongodb instance at the beginning, it's only fair that we remove it.
